# A virtual DOM in 200 lines of JavaScript – Marcelo Lazaroni – Developing for the Interwebs

In this post I’ll walk through the full implementation of a Virtual DOM in a bit over 200 lines of JavaScript.

The result is a full-featured and sufficiently performant virtual DOM library ([demos](https://omnivore.app/mahoo12138/https-lazamar-github-io-virtual-dom-1904da62dfe#demos)). It’s available on NPM as the [smvc](https://github.com/lazamar/smvc) package.

The main goal is to illustrate the fundamental technique behind tools like React.

React, Vue and the Elm language all simplify the creation of interactive web pages by allowing you to describe how you’d like the page to look like, and not worry about adding/removing elements to get there. They do that through a Virtual DOM.

## The goal of a virtual DOM

It’s not about performance.

A Virtual DOM is an abstraction to simplify the act of modifying a UI.

You describe how you would like your page to look like and the library takes care of taking the DOM from its current state, to the state you want it to be in.

## The key idea

The library will take over a single DOM element and operate inside of it.

This element should be initially empty, and we operate under the assumption that nothing other than our library will ever modify it. This will be the root of the user’s application.

If only we can modify it, then we can know exactly what is inside this element without needing to inspect it. How? By keeping track of all modifications we did to it so far.

We will track what is inside our root node by keeping a structure containing a simplified representation of each HTML element. Or more precisely, each DOM node.

Because this representation is a reflection of a DOM node, but it is not in the real DOM, let’s call it a virtual node, which will make up our virtual DOM.

The user will never create real DOM nodes, only those virtual ones. They will tell us how the entire page should look like by using virtual nodes. Then our library will take care of modifying the real DOM to make it conform to our representation of it.

To know what to modify, our library will take the virtual DOM created by the user and compare it to the virtual DOM representing how the page currently looks like. This process is called _diffing_. It will take note of the differences such as which elements should be added or removed and which properties should be added or removed. The output of diffing is a virtual DOM _diff_.

Then we will _apply_ the changes from that diff to the real DOM. Once we are done with the modifications, the virtual DOM created by the user has now become the current faithful representation of the real DOM.

So, for the UI part of things we need to:

1. _Create_ a virtual representation of the DOM
2. _Diff_ virtual DOM nodes
3. _Apply_ a virtual DOM diff to an HTML element

After building that we will see how to put such virtual DOM to good use as a powerful library by adding state handling in just a few lines of code.